---
layout: post
title: Bodhi Linux 5.0.0 On T400
date: 2018-09-03 00:15:35-04:00
categories: linux legacy hardware
---

## Trying Out Bodhi 5.0.0 on *New* T400

Of course, this is the Thinkpad I bought off of Ebay for a few dollars
last week.  It was manufactured in 2008 or 2009, so there's not much *new*
about it, except to me.  I've been thinking about Bodhi Linux for years,
but I've never had occasion to install it until now.  I've tried the live
version several times to see if it would run on older hardware (it does),
but it wasn't until today that I thought I'd install it on another disk
for this laptop.  (I still have a 250G SSD that cames right out when I
swap in this SSD.  Both SSDs boot just fine.)

The install was pretty straightforward. I had to hunt a minute to the
install program.  And then I needed to configure the network manager,
which wasn't immediately obvious.  But I eventually figured that out and
got the system installed just fine.  When I did, my system basically
looked like this (after I installed GKRellM and added some virtual
desktops):

<a data-flickr-embed="true"  href="https://www.flickr.com/photos/deepbsd/43530817345/in/dateposted-public/" title="shot-2018-09-03_00-21-24"><img src="https://farm2.staticflickr.com/1851/43530817345_eff0d66280_b.jpg" width="1024" height="640" alt="shot-2018-09-03_00-21-24"></a><script async src="//embedr.flickr.com/assets/client-code.js" charset="utf-8"></script>

# First Impressions

Since this system uses a variation of the old Enlightenment Window Manager
from the 90s, which I have never run in any form for more than a day, I
was both curious and confused.

I still don't know how to use this WM, but I do remember how cool it was
back in the day.  I think it's probably much cooler now than it ever was.
And it's probably also a whole lot better.  I'm talking about the very
early days of Linux.  Predominant WMs had names like FVWM and TWM.  There
were some other ones, all very new, but Enlightenment seemed to have been
designed by designers and artists.  It just had an artistic feel that
didn't seem to come from engineers.  It was beautiful.  Combine it with
nice wallpaper, and you had yourself an amazing desktop.  Unfortunately,
with great artistic expression comes the possibility for unstability, and
E, as it was known, could suffer from that from time to time.  I wound up
not using it longer than a week or so.  

But this is a whole new project.  Moksha grew out of the rubble of the old
project, I guess, but it's source tree probably has little if anything in
common with the original.  This is a very modern looking and
stable-running desktop.  I have no signs of instability.  Seems to run
like a top.

As far as me being confused, this is not your dad's desktop.  I cannot
find things in a single click, like I can on a number of other desktops.
This desktop is different.  Perhaps it's not *that* different, but I'm
needing more time to get comfortable.  For example, the first thing I do
when I open a new distro is find the Terminal.  It took me some time to
find it in the menus.  And then it took me some time to configure it how I
like it, which I still haven't fully accomplished.  Normally these tasks
are pretty straightforward.  But not tonight.  The terminal is called
*Terminology*, which I have not used before.  It appears to be very
lightweight, but it's different.




