---
layout: post
title: Saying Goodbye to My Molar
date: 2018-05-22 23:37:19-04:00
categories: personal
---

## I Lost My Molar

Yesterday, while I was chatting with my mentor about my React App, and about the timing problem I
had with setState(), my head seemed to explode with pain coming from my upper right molar.  I had
not been having a problem that I knew of, and out of nowhere, I was overcome with sudden,
spontaneous pain.

I had to cut short the conference, because I couldn't concentrate anyway.  My brain had gone from
solving this timing problem and understanding how React schedules state changes with setState to
holding my head and feeling whether the pain could be helped by feeling my gums with various
fingers.  Nothing helped.  I wound up taking about 40 Advils that night.  Eventually, I could get
some sleep.  As soon as I broke off with my mentor, I called the dentist, and I managed to get an
emergency appointment my dentist, bless his heart, and he gave me the news this morning: 

> Your tooth is toast.

Actually, he didn't say this, so I should not make it a direct quote.  But I liked the
alliteration, so I'm going with it.  

It turns out that this tooth had a fracture for as long as my dentist has known me.  It has been
documented as far back as 2001.  So I've had it for at least 17 years, and he suspected it was a
pre-existing condition.  He asked if I had extractions when I was a young boy getting
orthodonture work and braces.  I said I had.  He said that in the old days (yes, I am old)
orthodontists did that, but they eventually realized this was a dumb idea.  Perhaps because it
jeopardized surrounding teeth that no longer has the support for the root systems of nearby teeth
and could eventually cause fractures in surrounding teeth?  Well, I had one of those.

# The Root Canal that Wasn't

My dentist gave me the bad news, but that was only the beginning.  The saga extends for at least
one more sequal, which happened today 3pm.  I met the endontist.

I'm not sure what _endontist_ means.  But I'm pretty sure he makes a lot of money, as if my
dentist didn't make enough.  But he's a very nice guy, extremely professional and fun and, well,
I like him.  Plus he's in charge of making my root canals pleasant and not scary.  So I'm not
going to antagonize him.  The plan was to start a root canal and figure out whether this fracture
in my tooth would allow me to solve my problem with a simple root canal.

My endontist said to me, after about twenty minutes, that he would not be able to save the tooth.
The fractures were too deep.  He showed me the pictures, and I could see the fractures myself.
It was basically a split tooth.  No way could a root canal hold over time.  The tooth would have
to be extracted.

# Next Steps...

Next is deciding whether to go with an implant or a bridge.  A bridge takes the surrounding teeth
around the hole (created by the extracted tooth) and killing them with a root canal.  Apparently,
a structure is built that anchors the new replacement tooth as a permanent fixture between these
two teeth.  

The preferred way is to construct an implant in the hole created by the missing tooth.  However,
it's a trickier proposition.  You have to create a bone graft for the new stud to attach to.
Before that can happen, since this was on my upper jaw, not on my jawbone, my sinuses have to be
pushed out of the way.  We're talking about some serious surgery here, folks.  This is not a
trivial procedure, apparently.  It takes about 8-months after the extraction to get a working
implant.

It's possible I won't be a candidate for this decision.  In that case, the only options will be
to leave a hole or construct a bridge.  Sounds to me like constructing a bridge might be even
more of a problem, because now you've got to kill two teeth that have been working fine.  And
then you split the workload of three teeth across two teeth.  Not sure how that works out well.
But perhaps we're at the stage of playing the cards we have left.  I'm not sure what's best in
this case.  Is not getting a replacement tooth not an option?  That's what I don't know.

Time was, it used to be the only option.  If you lost a tooth, you had a hole there.  But now
there are solutions.  And sometimes the hi-tech solution is worse than the problem.  Not sure if
that applies here, but I have to ask myself the question now.  

Oh well, at least my skull isn't throbbing, so I'm a lot better off than I was 24 hours ago.

Thanks for reading!
