---
layout: post
title: i3wm-Lifestyle-Expression
date: 2018-04-17 08:24:23-04:00
categories: Linux UNIX
---

## What is i3wm?

In a way, we're heading down a rabbit hole that leads into the past, but it
probably also leads right into the future at the same time.  Some ideas are so
good that they never leave.  The command line interface (CLI) is one of those.  

The i3 window manager is one of those ideas that capitalizes on other great
ideas.  It's a tiling window manager that exploits the power of the CLI in order
to get your work done.  It gets the desktop out of your way.  It gets the mouse
out of your way.  It has a learning curve, like all things CLI, but the payoffs
keep getting larger and larger as time goes on and your skillls improve.  

# UNIX Legacy

This legacy is full of more great ideas that have stood the test of time.  These
ideas came from a time when the CRT (Cathode Ray Tube) was a brand new thing.
There were no mice.  The CLI was all there was, and it was amazing (Hey, you
didn't have to throw manual switches anymore, mostly).  Magnetic tape was new,
although there might have been some paper tapes lying around.  

Keyboards had the letter keys, an escape key, and a control key.  There might
have been a function key or a special key somewhere.  The only number keys were
along the top.  They keyboard layout was extremely simple.  The first terminals
were basically electric typewriters (teletype) that were connected by wire to
mainframe computers. [Here's a basic
history.](http://www.computerhistory.org/timeline/computers/) You can also see
the original keyboard layout [here](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Vi) in this
article about the VI editor.

Amazingly, people got their work done without a mouse or a graphical interface.
This was around the summer of 1977 when Bill Joy started writing Vi. Ken
Thompson had already written UNIX using a line editor (probably similar to Ex,
called Em), so adding a full-screen visual mode to Ex.  

# The Early PCs

It wasn't until the mid-eighties that the term *personal* computers came into
usage.  These were _small_ machines about the size of a larger ATX box of today.
But monitors were monochromatic, and keyboards were only of the large variety.
The PCs had 8-bit processors and a floppy disk (360 kilobytes) and perhaps
something like 32 kilobytes of RAM.  The first hard disk I remember had 10
Megabytes of disk space.  They cost perhaps $3000 but could easily cost far more
with peripherals.

There were much smaller machines available that were priced as "toys" for
children, such as the Commodore Vic 20 and 64.  There were several of these
brands available, and the average person could actually afford one of these.  My
first PC was a Commodore 64 I bought used for $200.  I bought the extra disk
drive and used a small television as a monitor.  The CPU was actually contained
inside the keyboard!  You connected your monitor and disk drive to the keyboard.

Try comparing this situation with the first computing experience of today's
youth, and it is very different.  People today cannot remember a time when there
was *not* a graphical interface and a mouse.  They grew up thinking that a
computer thought in pictures!  They conceptualize the filesystem like a filing
cabinet.  This is a significant departure from how people of my generation grew
up thinking about computer filesystems.

# The Early Operating Systems

UNIX was well established at this time, in several varieties from several
vendors, but it was available only for larger machines, not really for personal
computers yet.  For personal computers of the IBM style, there was Microsoft
DOS, and also CP/M for similar machines with Motorola z80 cpu's.  The "toy"
computers had their own proprietary OSes, which were popular but only ran on
those "toy" PCs.  MS-DOS was what people used mostly.  Apple's first Macintosh
came out in 1984, but it was too expensive for my pocketbook.  That was the
first graphical interface I actually could see on desktops.  And then there was
Windows from Microsoft.  It mostly sucked.  But the Mac was all you could
compare it to, and at least if you had an IBM-compatible, you could probably
afford Windows.

The Apple II was what I wrote my first programs on.  But my university owned the
hardware.  There were computer labs where row after row of Apple II's were lined
up, and you could go in, insert your 5.25inch floppy disk, and go to work on
your Pascal program.  But I couldn't afford even an Apple II, let alone a
Macintosh.  

I wanted to buy a KayPro, running CP/M.  I thought this would be a great machine
for writing and programming.  But once I saw someone playing a game on the
Commodore, and then I saw how many games were available for it, I bought the
C-64.  In hindsight, I think it was the better decision.  

Once you got a hold of an IBM-compatible, though, you were pretty much resigned
to run MS-DOS.  And that was where I began to dislike Microsoft.  I used OS/2
whenever I could.  But it was too little too late.  When I first installed
Slackware 3.0 in 1996, that was it.  Linux had landed in my world, and it's been
here with me ever since.

## What is a Window Manager?

In the early days of Linux, there were no graphical installers.  You didn't
insert a DVD or USB stick and boot from it into a live desktop.  You usually
booted from floppy disks into a command line.  From there you started formatting
disk partitions or slices and putting together mount points for your system.  It
took a long time before saw a mouse cursor on your screen, if ever.  But the
program you ran was XFree86 in those days, and then you could run a window
manager on top of that.  Fvwm was a popular one then.  And it handled drawing
your windows and providing you with one or more virtual desktops.  There was
usually some kind of bar or something you could launch a terminal with.  But
even then, you did most of your work at a terminal inside a desktop "workspace".

It wasn't until quite a bit later that Gnome and KDE appeared as Desktop
Environments.  And you needed a fairly beefy computer to run those environments,
since they required more resources than a window manager.

So using a window manager again is like Old Home Week for me.  And of course,
using the terminal has always felt like home.  

# A Tiling Window Manager?

I never used to like tiling window managers, because they covered up your
desktop wallpaper.  You couldn't see your cool Star Trek of Star Wars photo,
because it was all covered up by your tiled windows.  But in those days, you
couldn't really turn on opacity either.  So I didn't get it.  But now that
graphical environments are everywhere, and the mouse has become more of a burden
than a boon, I'm re-discovering what a desktop is like without being so
dependent on a mouse.

And I love it.  It's like driving a standard transmission again.  It's
satisfying.  It's like a dude ranch or riding horses or something.  It makes me
feel like a man.  It's a good feeling.  Like I have complete control over my
desktop.  It's daunting, needing to control everything at that microscopic
level, but it's also nice.

If I don't feel like handling all that complexity, I can just run Cinnamon or
something, and just get my work done.  But when I run i3, it's an adventure.
It's like rediscovering Linux again.  It makes me feel like a kid again.


