---
layout: post
title: Solus Mate On T400
date: 2018-10-08 23:10:38-04:00
categories: Linux Thinkpad
---
## Solus Mate on an Old T400

So I guess I have a thing for old Thinkpad T400's.  For about $20 per copy, who can blame
me?  That's almost giving then away!  But the real story here is Solus Mate.  It's a very
lightweight desktop that works great on older laptops.  You cannot always say that with
modern desktops, but Mate is an exception.  By the way, Mate is pronounced *Mah' tay*. At
least that's what I understand, but I doubt the pronunciation police are very interested in
infractions on the point.

Here's a screenshot:

<a data-flickr-embed="true"  href="https://www.flickr.com/photos/deepbsd/44471004834/in/dateposted-public/" title="Solus-T400"><img src="https://farm2.staticflickr.com/1939/44471004834_0e4f03a806_b.jpg" width="1024" height="640" alt="Solus-T400"></a><script async src="//embedr.flickr.com/assets/client-code.js" charset="utf-8"></script>

As you can see, it's a clean-looking desktop.  On a laptop you don't always have a lot of
screen real estate, so you need to take advantage of what little there is.  Mate doesn't
waste any.  You'll probably want to exploit the virtual desktops quite a bit, and Mate has
a nice desktop switcher.

Mate can take advantage of all the old gnome2 themes as well as many of the new gnome3
themes.  I'm fond of the Arc dark themes and the icon themes to go with it.  The terminal
fonts work well too.  They're clear and sharp despite the low-ish resolution of the
display.  And they're clear as a bell to my old eyes.  No fatigue setting in anytime soon
for my peepers.  

As you can tell, it's no problem running a recent kernel on Solus.  I'm running 4.18.9 with
no problems at all.

## Running Solus

We know that Mate is a breeze.  What about Solus?

It's a newer distro.  It's not going to be as established as Ubuntu or Fedora or the like.
However, don't tell the folks at Solus that.  The chances are good you might be surprised
just how polished this distribution is.  

The package manager is called `eopkg`, and it's full-featured as well as reliable.  The
only problem I've run into is that Solus might lack a small handfull of apps that I could
easily find on other distros.  But that's simply a matter of time before other users with
tastes like mine ask for their apps to be added.  For example, I'm a fan of GKrellM, that
little performance meter you see on the right side of my desktop.  It's a very simple old
app, originally written for gtk2.  You have to install some gtk2 development files in order
to compile the app.  The dependencies are simple, and I don't recall having to edit any
Makefiles.  Once I got the dependencies, GKrellM built in a jiffy.  It just took a minute
longer than installing the binary with eopkg.

I'm also running Spotify and Slack, which I found in the 3rd Party section of the app
installer.  Same with Atom editor and Sublime Text.  (I'm a vim guy, but I'm fond of Atom
and Sublime!!)  

My understanding is that Solus is *very* responsive to their users.  If I sent the
developers an email requesting the addition of GKrellM to the repos, I'll bet it gets added
within hours or perhaps a few days at most.  You probably could not expect that kind of
service on larger distributions

## Solus Philosophy

I'm brand new to Solus, but if I were to guess about the distribution's philosophy based
upon experience, it would be they aim for expert-level professionalism.  The distribution
exudes excellence everyplace I tend to look.  Things just work.  I haven't been running
this distro that long, but I haven't found a single wart.  Nothing has given me any grief
with this distro.  I find myself looking for any excuse to use this machine with the Solus
distro on it.

The distro looks nice.  It makes me feel nice as I use it.  And I find myself smiling each
time I notice something else I like.  I'm reminded of a Robert Frost poem and of my
bastardization of it as I use this Solus Mate distro:  

> *Smiles and smiles to go before I sleep...*
